CHAPTER 1: Windows Internals Overview (PDF pages 9-27)

===== [PDF page 9] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
This chapter describes the most important concepts in the internal workings of Windows. Some of the
topics will be described in greater detail later in the book, where it’s closely related to the topic at hand.
Make sure you understand the concepts in this chapter, as these make the foundations upon any driver
and even user mode low-level code, is built.
In this chapter:
• Processes
• Virtual Memory
• Threads
• System Services
• System Architecture
• Handles and Objects
Processes
A process is a containment and management object that represents a running instance of a program. The
term “process runs” which is used fairly often, is inaccurate. Processes don’t run – processes manage.
Threads are the ones that execute code and technically run. From a high-level perspective, a process owns
the following:
• An executable program, which contains the initial code and data used to execute code within the
process. This is true for most processes, but some special ones don’t have an executable image
(created directly by the kernel).
• A private virtual address space, used for allocating memory for whatever purposes the code within
the process needs it.
• An access token (called primary token), which is an object that stores the security context of the
process, used by threads executing in the process (unless a thread assumes a different token by using
impersonation).
• A private handle table to executive objects, such as events, semaphores, and files.
• One or more threads of execution. A normal user-mode process is created with one thread (executing
the classic main/WinMain function). A user mode process without threads is mostly useless, and
under normal circumstances will be destroyed by the kernel.

===== [PDF page 10] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
4
These elements of a process are depicted in figure 1-1.
Figure 1-1: Important ingredients of a process
A process is uniquely identified by its Process ID, which remains unique as long as the kernel process object
exists. Once it’s destroyed, the same ID may be reused for new processes. It’s important to realize that the
executable file itself is not a unique identifier of a process. For example, there may be five instances of
notepad.exe running at the same time. Each of these Notepad instances has its own address space, threads,
handle table, process ID, etc. All those five processes are using the same image file (notepad.exe) as their
initial code and data. Figure 1-2 shows a screenshot of Task Manager’s Details tab showing five instances
of Notepad.exe, each with its own attributes.

===== [PDF page 11] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
5
Figure 1-2: Five instances of notepad
Virtual Memory
Every process has its own virtual, private, linear address space. This address space starts out empty (or
close to empty, since the executable image and NtDll.Dll are the first to be mapped, followed by more
subsystem DLLs). Once execution of the main (first) thread begins, memory is likely to be allocated, more
DLLs loaded, etc. This address space is private, which means other processes cannot access it directly.
The address space range starts at zero (technically the first and last 64KB of the address space cannot be
committed), and goes all the way to a maximum which depends on the process “bitness” (32 or 64 bit) and
the operating system “bitness” as follows:
• For 32-bit processes on 32-bit Windows systems, the process address space size is 2 GB by default.
• For 32-bit processes on 32-bit Windows systems that use the increase user virtual address space
setting, can be configured to have up to 3GB of address space per process. To get the extended
address space, the executable from which the process was created must have been marked with the
LARGEADDRESSAWARE linker flag in its PE header. If it was not, it would still be limited to 2 GB.
• For 64-bit processes (on a 64-bit Windows system, naturally), the address space size is 8 TB (Windows
8 and earlier) or 128 TB (Windows 8.1 and later).
• For 32-bit processes on a 64-bit Windows system, the address space size is 4 GB if the executable
image has the LARGEADDRESSAWARE flag in its PE header. Otherwise, the size remains at 2 GB.
The requirement of the LARGEADDRESSAWARE flag stems from the fact that a 2 GB address
range requires 31 bits only, leaving the most significant bit (MSB) free for application use.
Specifying this flag indicates that the program is not using bit 31 for anything and so having
that bit set (which would happen for addresses larger than 2 GB) is not an issue.

===== [PDF page 12] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
6
Each process has its own address space, which makes any process address relative, rather than absolute.
For example, when trying to determine what lies in address 0x20000, the address itself is not enough; the
process to which this address relates to must be specified.
The memory itself is called virtual, which means there is an indirect relationship between an address
and the exact location where it’s found in physical memory (RAM). A buffer within a process may be
mapped to physical memory, or it may temporarily reside in a file (such as a page file). The term virtual
refers to the fact that from an execution perspective, there is no need to know if the memory about to be
accessed is in RAM or not; if the memory is indeed mapped to RAM, the CPU will perform the virtual-
to-physical translation before accessing the data. if the memory is not resident (specified by a flag in the
translation table entry), the CPU will raise a page fault exception that causes the memory manager’s page
fault handler to fetch the data from the appropriate file (if indeed it’s a valid page fault), copy it to RAM,
make the required changes in the page table entries that map the buffer, and instruct the CPU to try again.
Figure 1-3 shows this conceptual mapping from virtual to physical memory for two processes.
Figure 1-3: virtual memory mapping
The unit of memory management is called a page. Every attribute related to memory is always at a
page’s granularity, such as its protection or state. The size of a page is determined by CPU type (and on
some processors, may be configurable), and in any case, the memory manager must follow suit. Normal
(sometimes called small) page size is 4 KB on all Windows-supported architectures.
Apart from the normal (small) page size, Windows also supports large pages. The size of a large page is 2
MB (x86/x64/ARM64) or 4 MB (ARM). This is based on using the Page Directory Entry (PDE) to map the
large page without using a page table. This results in quicker translation, but most importantly better use
of the Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) – a cache of recently translated pages maintained by the CPU.

===== [PDF page 13] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
7
In the case of a large page, a single TLB entry maps significantly more memory than a small page.
The downside of large pages is the need to have the memory contiguous in RAM, which can
fail if memory is tight or very fragmented. Also, large pages are always non-pageable and can
only use read/write protection.
Huge pages
of 1 GB in size are supported on Windows 10 and Server 2016 and later. These are used automatically with
large pages if an allocation is at least 1 GB in size, and that size can be located as contiguous in RAM.
Page States
Each page in virtual memory can be in one of three states:
• Free – the page is not allocated in any way; there is nothing there. Any attempt to access that page
would cause an access violation exception. Most pages in a newly created process are free.
• Committed – the reverse of free; an allocated page that can be accessed successfully (assuming non-
conflicting protection attributes; for example, writing to a read-only page causes an access violation).
Committed pages are mapped to RAM or to a file (such as a page file).
• Reserved – the page is not committed, but the address range is reserved for possible future
commitment. From the CPU’s perspective, it’s the same as Free – any access attempt raises an
access violation exception. However, new allocation attempts using the VirtualAlloc function
(or NtAllocateVirtualMemory, the related native API) that does not specify a specific address
would not allocate in the reserved region. A classic example of using reserved memory to maintain
contiguous virtual address space while conserving committed memory usage is described later in
this chapter in the section “Thread Stacks”.
System Memory
The lower part of the address space is for user-mode processes use. While a particular thread is executing,
its associated process address space is visible from address zero to the upper limit as described in the
previous section. The operating system, however, must also reside somewhere – and that somewhere is
the upper address range that’s supported on the system, as follows:
• On 32-bit systems running without the increase user virtual address space setting, the operating sys-
tem resides in the upper 2 GB of virtual address space, from address 0x80000000 to 0xFFFFFFFF.
• On 32-bit systems configured with the increase user virtual address space setting, the operating
system resides in the address space left. For example, if the system is configured with 3 GB user
address space per process (the maximum), the OS takes the upper 1 GB (from address 0xC0000000
to 0xFFFFFFFF). The component that suffers mostly from this address space reduction is the file
system cache.
• On 64-bit systems running Windows 8, Server 2012 and earlier, the OS takes the upper 8 TB of virtual
address space.
• On 64-bit systems running Windows 8.1, Server 2012 R2 and later, the OS takes the upper 128 TB of
virtual address space.

===== [PDF page 14] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
8
Figure 1-4 shows the virtual memory layout for the two “extreme” cases: 32-bit process on a 32-bit system
(left) and a 64-bit process on a 64-bit system (right).
Figure 1-4: virtual memory layout
System space is not process-relative – after all, it’s the same system, the same kernel, the same drivers that
service every process on the system (the exception is some system memory that is on a per-session basis
but is not important for this discussion). It follows that any address in system space is absolute rather than
relative, since it “looks” the same from every process context. Of course, actual access from user mode into
system space results in an access violation exception.
System space is where the kernel itself, the Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL), and kernel drivers reside
once loaded. Thus, kernel drivers are automatically protected from direct user mode access. It also means
they have a potentially system-wide impact. For example, if a kernel driver leaks memory, that memory
will not be freed even after the driver unloads. User-mode processes, on the other hand, can never leak
anything beyond their lifetime. The kernel is responsible for closing and freeing everything private to a
dead process (all handles are closed and all private memory is freed).
Threads
The actual entities that execute code are threads. A Thread is contained within a process, using the
resources exposed by the process to do work (such as virtual memory and handles to kernel objects).
The most important information a thread owns is the following:
• Current access mode, either user or kernel.
• Execution context, including processor registers and execution state.
• One or two stacks, used for local variable allocations and call management.
• Thread Local Storage (TLS) array, which provides a way to store thread-private data with uniform
access semantics.
• Base priority and a current (dynamic) priority.
• Processor affinity, indicating on which processors the thread is allowed to run on.

===== [PDF page 15] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
9
The most common states a thread can be in are:
• Running – currently executing code on a (logical) processor.
• Ready – waiting to be scheduled for execution because all relevant processors are busy or
unavailable.
• Waiting – waiting for some event to occur before proceeding. Once the event occurs, the thread
goes to the Ready state.
Figure 1-5 shows the state diagram for these states. The numbers in parenthesis indicate the state numbers,
as can be viewed by tools such as Performance Monitor. Note that the Ready state has a sibling state called
Deferred Ready, which is similar, and exists to minimize internal locking.
Figure 1-5: Common thread states
Thread Stacks
Each thread has a stack it uses while executing, used to store local variables, parameters passed to functions
(in some cases), and where return addresses are stored prior to making function calls. A thread has at least
one stack residing in system (kernel) space, and it’s pretty small (default is 12 KB on 32-bit systems and 24
KB on 64-bit systems). A user-mode thread has a second stack in its process user-space address range and
is considerably larger (by default can grow to 1 MB). An example with three user-mode threads and their
stacks is shown in figure 1-6. In the figure, threads 1 and 2 are in process A and thread 3 is in process B.
The kernel stack always resides in RAM while the thread is in the Running or Ready states. The reason
for this is subtle and will be discussed later in this chapter. The user-mode stack, on the other hand, may
be paged out, just like any other user-mode memory.
The user-mode stack is handled differently than the kernel-mode stack in terms of its size. It starts out
with a certain amount of committed memory (could be as small as a single page), where the next page is
committed with a PAGE_GUARD attribute. The rest of the stack address space memory is reserved, thus
not wasting memory. The idea is to grow the stack in case the thread’s code needs to use more stack space.

===== [PDF page 16] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
10
If the thread needs more stack space it would access the guard page which would throw a page-guard
exception. The memory manager then removes the guard protection, and commits an additional page,
marking it with a PAGE_GUARD attribute. This way, the stack grows as needed, avoiding the entire stack
memory being committed upfront. Figure 1-7 shows this layout.
Figure 1-6: User mode threads and their stacks
Technically, Windows uses 3 guard pages rather than one in most cases.

===== [PDF page 17] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
11
Figure 1-7: Thread’s stack in user space
The sizes of a thread’s user-mode stack are determined as follows:
• The executable image has a stack commit and reserved values in its Portable Executable (PE) header.
These are taken as defaults if a thread does not specify alternative values. These are always used for
the first thread in the process.
• When a thread is created with CreateThread (or similar functions), the caller can specify its
required stack size, either the upfront committed size or the reserved size (but not both), depending
on a flag provided to the function; specifying zero uses the defaults set in the PE header.
Curiously enough, the functions CreateThread and CreateRemoteThread(Ex) only
allow specifying a single value for the stack size and can be the committed or the reserved size,
but not both. The native (undocumented) function, NtCreateThreadEx allows specifying
both values.
System Services (a.k.a. System Calls)
Applications need to perform various operations that are not purely computational, such as allocating
memory, opening files, creating threads, etc. These operations can only be ultimately performed by code
running in kernel mode. So how would user-mode code be able to perform such operations?
Let’s take a common (simple) example: a user running a Notepad process uses the File / Open menu to
request opening a file. Notepad’s code responds by calling the CreateFile documented Windows API
function. CreateFile is documented as implemented in kernel32.Dll, one of the Windows subsystem
DLLs. This function still runs in user mode, so there is no way it can directly open a file. After some
error checking, it calls NtCreateFile, a function implemented in NTDLL.dll, a foundational DLL that
implements the API known as the Native API, and is the lowest layer of code which is still in user mode.
This function (documented in the Windows Driver Kit for device driver developers) is the one that makes
the transition to kernel mode. Before the actual transition, it puts a number, called system service number,
into a CPU register (EAX on Intel/AMD architectures). Then it issues a special CPU instruction (syscall

===== [PDF page 18] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
12
on x64 or sysenter on x86) that makes the actual transition to kernel mode while jumping to a predefined
routine called the system service dispatcher.
The system service dispatcher, in turn, uses the value in that EAX register as an index into a System Service
Dispatch Table (SSDT). Using this table, the code jumps to the system service (system call) itself. For
our Notepad example, the SSDT entry would point to the NtCreateFile function, implemented by the
kernel’s I/O manager. Notice the function has the same name as the one in NTDLL.dll, and has the same
parameters as well. On the kernel side is the real implementation. Once the system service is complete,
the thread returns to user mode to execute the instruction following sysenter/syscall. This sequence
of calls is depicted in figure 1-8.
Figure 1-8: System service function call flow

===== [PDF page 19] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
13
General System Architecture
Figure 1-9 shows the general architecture of Windows, comprising of user-mode and kernel-mode
components.
Figure 1-9: Windows system architecture
Here’s a quick rundown of the named boxes appearing in figure 1-9:
• User processes
These are normal processes based on image files, executing on the system, such as instances of
Notepad.exe, cmd.exe, explorer.exe, and so on.
• Subsystem DLLs
Subsystem DLLs are dynamic link libraries (DLLs) that implement the API of a subsystem. A
subsystem is a particular view of the capabilities exposed by the kernel. Technically, starting from
Windows 8.1, there is only a single subsystem – the Windows Subsystem. The subsystem DLLs
include well-known files, such as kernel32.dll, user32.dll, gdi32.dll, advapi32.dll, combase.dll, and
many others. These include mostly the officially documented API of Windows.
• NTDLL.DLL
A system-wide DLL, implementing the Windows native API. This is the lowest layer of code which
is still in user mode. Its most important role is to make the transition to kernel mode for system call
invocation. NTDLL also implements the Heap Manager, the Image Loader and some part of the user
mode thread pool.

===== [PDF page 20] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
14
• Service Processes
Service processes are normal Windows processes that communicate with the Service Control
Manager (SCM, implemented in services.exe) and allow some control over their lifetime. The SCM
can start, stop, pause, resume and send other messages to services. Services typically execute under
one of the special Windows accounts – local system, network service or local service.
• Executive
The Executive is the upper layer of NtOskrnl.exe (the “kernel”). It hosts most of the code that is
in kernel mode. It includes mostly the various “managers”: Object Manager, Memory Manager, I/O
Manager, Plug & Play Manager, Power Manager, Configuration Manager, etc. It’s by far larger than
the lower Kernel layer.
• Kernel
The Kernel layer implements the most fundamental and time-sensitive parts of kernel-mode OS
code. This includes thread scheduling, interrupt and exception dispatching, and implementation of
various kernel primitives such as mutexes and semaphores. Some of the kernel code is written in
CPU-specific machine language for efficiency and for getting direct access to CPU-specific details.
• Device Drivers
Device drivers are loadable kernel modules. Their code executes in kernel mode and so has the full
power of the kernel. This book is dedicated to writing certain types of kernel drivers.
• Win32k.sys
This is the kernel-mode component of the Windows subsystem. Essentially, it’s a kernel module
(driver) that handles the user interface part of Windows and the classic Graphics Device Inter-
face (GDI) APIs. This means that all windowing operations (CreateWindowEx, GetMessage,
PostMessage, etc.) are handled by this component. The rest of the system has little-to-none
knowledge of UI.
• Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)
The HAL is a software abstraction layer over the hardware closest to the CPU. It allows device
drivers to use APIs that do not require detailed and specific knowledge of things like Interrupt
Controllers or DMA controller. Naturally, this layer is mostly useful for device drivers written to
handle hardware devices.
• System Processes
System processes is an umbrella term used to describe processes that are typically “just there”, doing
their thing where normally these processes are not communicated with directly. They are important
nonetheless, and some in fact, critical to the system’s well-being. Terminating some of them is fatal
and causes a system crash. Some of the system processes are native processes, meaning they use
the native API only (the API implemented by NTDLL). Example system processes include Smss.exe,
Lsass.exe, Winlogon.exe, and Services.exe.
• Subsystem Process
The Windows subsystem process, running the image Csrss.exe, can be viewed as a helper to the
kernel for managing processes running under the Windows subsystem. It is a critical process,
meaning if killed, the system would crash. There is one Csrss.exe instance per session, so on a
standard system two instances would exist – one for session 0 and one for the logged-on user session
(typically 1). Although Csrss.exe is the “manager” of the Windows subsystem (the only one left these
days), its importance goes beyond just this role.

===== [PDF page 21] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
15
• Hyper-V Hypervisor
The Hyper-V hypervisor exists on Windows 10 and server 2016 (and later) systems if they support
Virtualization Based Security (VBS). VBS provides an extra layer of security, where the normal OS is
a virtual machine controlled by Hyper-V. Two distinct Virtual Trust Levels (VTLs) are defined, where
VTL 0 consists of the normal user-mode/kernel-mode we know of, and VTL 1 contains the secure
kernel and Isolated User Mode (IUM). VBS is beyond the scope of this book. For more information,
check out the Windows Internals book and/or the Microsoft documentation.
Windows 10 version 1607 introduced the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL). Although this
may look like yet another subsystem, like the old POSIX and OS/2 subsystems supported by
Windows, it is not like that at all. The old subsystems were able to execute POSIX and OS/2 apps
if these were compiled using a Windows compiler to use the PE format and Windows system
calls. WSL, on the other hand, has no such requirement. Existing executables from Linux (stored
in ELF format) can be run as-is on Windows, without any recompilation.
To make something like this work, a new process type was created – the Pico process together
with a Pico provider. Briefly, a Pico process is an empty address space (minimal process) that is
used for WSL processes, where every system call (Linux system call) must be intercepted and
translated to the Windows system call(s) equivalent using that Pico provider (a device driver).
There is a true Linux (the user-mode part) installed on the Windows machine.
The above description is for WSL version 1. Starting with Windows 10 version 2004, Windows
supports a new version of WSL known as WSL 2. WSL 2 is not based on pico processes anymore.
Instead, it’s based on a hybrid virtual machine technology that allows installing a full Linux
system (including the Linux kernel), but still see and share the Windows machine’s resources,
such as the file system. WSL 2 is faster than WSL 1 and solves some edge cases that didn’t work
well in WSL 1, thanks to the real Linux kernel handling Linux system calls.
Handles and Objects
The Windows kernel exposes various types of objects for use by user-mode processes, the kernel itself and
kernel-mode drivers. Instances of these types are data structures in system space, created by the Object
Manager (part of the executive) when requested to do so by user-mode or kernel-mode code. Objects are
reference counted – only when the last reference to the object is released will the object be destroyed and
freed from memory.
Since these object instances reside in system space, they cannot be accessed directly by user mode. User
mode must use an indirect access mechanism, known as handles. A handle is an index to an entry in a table
maintained on a process by process basis, stored in kernel space, that points to a kernel object residing in
system space. There are various Create* and Open* functions to create/open objects and retrieve back
handles to these objects. For example, the CreateMutex user-mode function allows creating or opening a
mutex (depending on whether the object is named and exists). If successful, the function returns a handle
to the object. A return value of zero means an invalid handle (and a function call failure). The OpenMutex
function, on the other hand, tries to open a handle to a named mutex. If the mutex with that name does
not exist, the function fails and returns null (0).

===== [PDF page 22] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
16
Kernel (and driver) code can use either a handle or a direct pointer to an object. The choice is usually
based on the API the code wants to call. In some cases, a handle given by user mode to the driver must be
turned into a pointer with the ObReferenceObjectByHandle function. We’ll discuss these details in a
later chapter.
Most functions return null (zero) on failure, but some do not. Most notably, the CreateFile
function returns INVALID_HANDLE_VALUE (-1) if it fails.
Handle values are multiples of 4, where the first valid handle is 4; Zero is never a valid handle value.
Kernel-mode code can use handles when creating/opening objects, but they can also use direct pointers
to kernel objects. This is typically done when a certain API demands it. Kernel code can get a pointer
to an object given a valid handle using the ObReferenceObjectByHandle function. If successful,
the reference count on the object is incremented, so there is no danger that if the user-mode client
holding the handle decided to close it while kernel code holds a pointer to the object would now hold
a dangling pointer. The object is safe to access regardless of the handle-holder until the kernel code calls
ObDerefenceObject, which decrements the reference count; if the kernel code missed this call, that’s
a resource leak which will only be resolved in the next system boot.
All objects are reference counted. The object manager maintains a handle count and total reference count
for objects. Once an object is no longer needed, its client should close the handle (if a handle was used to
access the object) or dereference the object (if kernel client using a pointer). From that point on, the code
should consider its handle/pointer to be invalid. The Object Manager will destroy the object if its reference
count reaches zero.
Each object points to an object type, which holds information on the type itself, meaning there is a single
type object for each type of object. These are also exposed as exported global kernel variables, some of
which are defined in the kernel headers and are needed in certain cases, as we’ll see in later chapters.
Object Names
Some types of objects can have names. These names can be used to open objects by name with a suitable
Open function. Note that not all objects have names; for example, processes and threads don’t have names
– they have IDs. That’s why the OpenProcess and OpenThread functions require a process/thread
identifier (a number) rather than a string-base name. Another somewhat weird case of an object that does
not have a name is a file. The file name is not the object’s name – these are different concepts.
Threads appear to have a name (starting from Windows 10), that can be set with the user-
mode API SetThreadDescription. This is not, however, a true name, but rather a friendly
name/description most useful in debugging, as Visual Studio shows a thread’s description, if
there is any.

===== [PDF page 23] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
17
From user-mode code, calling a Create function with a name creates the object with that name if an object
with that name does not exist, but if it exists it just opens the existing object. In the latter case, calling
GetLastError returns ERROR_ALREADY_EXISTS, indicating this is not a new object, and the returned
handle is yet another handle to an existing object.
The name provided to a Create function is not actually the final name of the object. It’s prepended with
\Sessions\x\BaseNamedObjects\ where x is the session ID of the caller. If the session is zero, the name is
prepended with \BaseNamedObjects\. If the caller happens to be running in an AppContainer (typically
a Universal Windows Platform process), then the prepended string is more complex and consists of the
unique AppContainer SID: \Sessions\x\AppContainerNamedObjects\{AppContainerSID}.
All the above means is that object names are session-relative (and in the case of AppContainer – package
relative). If an object must be shared across sessions it can be created in session 0 by prepending
the object name with Global\; for example, creating a mutex with the CreateMutex function named
Global\MyMutex will create it under \BaseNamedObjects. Note that AppContainers do not have the power
to use session 0 object namespace.
This hierarchy can be viewed with the Sysinternals WinObj tool (run elevated) as shown in figure 1-10.
Figure 1-10: Sysinternals WinObj tool
The view shown in figure 1-9 is the object manager namespace, comprising of a hierarchy of named objects.
This entire structure is held in memory and manipulated by the Object Manager (part of the Executive)

===== [PDF page 24] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
18
as required. Note that unnamed objects are not part of this structure, meaning the objects seen in WinObj
do not comprise all the existing objects, but rather all the objects that were created with a name.
Every process has a private handle table to kernel objects (whether named or not), which can be viewed
with the Process Explorer and/or Handles Sysinternals tools. A screenshot of Process Explorer showing
handles in some process is shown in figure 1-11. The default columns shown in the handles view are the
object type and name only. However, there are other columns available, as shown in figure 1-11.
Figure 1-11: Viewing handles in processes with Process Explorer
By default, Process Explorer shows only handles for objects, which have names (according to Process
Explorer’s definition of a name, discussed shortly). To view all handles in a process, select Show Unnamed
Handles and Mappings from Process Explorer’s View menu.
The various columns in the handle view provide more information for each handle. The handle value and
the object type are self explanatory. The name column is tricky. It shows true object names for Mutexes
(Mutants), Semaphores, Events, Sections, ALPC Ports, Jobs, Timers, Directory (object manager Directories,
not file system directories), and other, less used object types. Yet others are shown with a name that has a
different meaning than a true named object:
• Process and Thread objects, the name is shown as their unique ID.
• For File objects, it shows the file name (or device name) pointed to by the file object. It’s not the
same as an object’s name, as there is no way to get a handle to a file object given the file name -
only a new file object may be created that accesses the same underlying file or device (assuming
sharing settings for the original file object allow it).
• (Registry) Key objects names are shown with the path to the registry key. This is not a name, for
the same reasoning as for file objects.
• Token object names are shown with the user name stored in the token.

===== [PDF page 25] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
19
Accessing Existing Objects
The Access column in Process Explorer’s handles view shows the access mask which was used to open or
create the handle. This access mask is key to what operations are allowed to be performed with a specific
handle. For example, if client code wants to terminate a process, it must call the OpenProcess function
first, to obtain a handle to the required process with an access mask of (at least) PROCESS_TERMINATE,
otherwise there is no way to terminate the process with that handle. If the call succeeds, then the call to
TerminateProcess is bound to succeed.
Here’s a user-mode example for terminating a process given a process ID:
bool KillProcess(DWORD pid) {
//
// open a powerful-enough handle to the process
//
HANDLE hProcess = OpenProcess(PROCESS_TERMINATE, FALSE, pid);
if (!hProcess)
return false;
//
// now kill it with some arbitrary exit code
//
BOOL success = TerminateProcess(hProcess, 1);
//
// close the handle
//
CloseHandle(hProcess);
return success != FALSE;
}
The Decoded Access column provides a textual description of the access mask (for some object types),
making it easier to identify the exact access allowed for a particular handle.
Double-clicking a handle entry (or right-clicking and selecting Properties) shows some of the object’s
properties. Figure 1-12 shows a screenshot of an example event object properties.

===== [PDF page 26] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
20
Figure 1-12: Object properties in Process Explorer
Notice that the dialog shown in figure 1-12 is for the object’s properties, rather than the handle’s. In other
words, looking at an object’s properties from any handle that points to the same object shows the same
information.
The properties in figure 1-12 include the object’s name (if any), its type, a short description, its address
in kernel memory, the number of open handles, and some specific object information, such as the state
and type of the event object shown. Note that the References shown do not indicate the actual number

===== [PDF page 27] =====
Chapter 1: Windows Internals Overview
21
of outstanding references to the object (it does prior to Windows 8.1). A proper way to see the actual
reference count for the object is to use the kernel debugger’s !trueref command, as shown here:
lkd> !object 0xFFFFA08F948AC0B0
Object: ffffa08f948ac0b0
Type: (ffffa08f684df140) Event
ObjectHeader: ffffa08f948ac080 (new version)
HandleCount: 2
PointerCount: 65535
Directory Object: ffff90839b63a700
Name: ShellDesktopSwitchEvent
lkd> !trueref ffffa08f948ac0b0
ffffa08f948ac0b0: HandleCount: 2 PointerCount: 65535 RealPointerCount: 3
We’ll take a closer look at the attributes of objects and the kernel debugger in later chapters.
In the next chapter, we’ll start writing a very simple driver to show and use many of the tools we’ll need
later in this book.
